---
title: Books that Influenced 
date: November 24, 2015
---

### Books that Influenced by thinking (2007-2016)

#### Hard

Non-fiction and textbooks

**Gödel, Escher, Bach** by Douglas Hofstadter

A strange discussion about formal systems and their occurrence in multiple
domains of human thinking, from philosophy and linguistics to computer science.
The book is highly non-linear and probably should be read in that fashion.

**Galois Theory** by Ian Stewart

Stewart's short presentation of the subject works up to Abel-Ruffini theorem in
a particularly elegant way, and much more concisely than Artin's presentation.

**Calculus** by Michael Spivak

Although more a of a book on real analysis, it is a beautifully written book
that covers the idea of calculus and real functions. The clarity of Spivak's
presentation and motivating examples is rare to find. Although it would be hard
to teach this book in an introductory course, it is a must read after the fact.

**Mathematics, Form and Function** by Saunders MacLane

MacLane's popular discussion about the large-scale structure of mathematics and
the underlying common ideas that gave rise to his formalization of category
theory. Should be required reading for first year math undergraduates to
understand the ideas that drive mathematical discovery and unification.

**Number, the Language of Science** by Tobias Dantzig

Tobias discusses the historical concept of mathematics from the rudimentary
counting of prehistoric man to the counterintuitive and bizarre ideas at the
edges of modern math.

**The Book of Numbers** by John Conway

A whimsical book on number theory that I remember distinctively from my
childhood. Probably the only children's book that touches on complex analysis
and hypersurreal numbers.

**Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs** by Gerald Jay Sussman

The classical introductory computer science book in scheme. Widely considered a
classic for good reasons, it really conveys the core ideas that underlying
modern computing better than other introductory text. Even if you don't know
scheme, forcing yourself to implement the projects will increase your
cross-language mental dexterity.

**Introduction to Functional Programming (1st Edition)** by Richard Bird and Philip Wadler

The beautiful introductory text that really conveys the elegance of the core
ideas of typed functional programming.

**Types and Programming Languages** by Benjamin Pierce

Pierce's book on type theory (TAPL) was revolutionary and has become the "bible"
of programming language theory. Although some chapters are a little dated, the
core ideas and algorithms are foundational to modern programming language
design.  Although this book is great at explaining the implementation of
type-checkers there is not yet that covers the full end-to-end implementation of
modern functional compilers.

**Software Foundations** by Benjamin Pierce

**Artificial Intelligence** by Russell and Norvig

**The Quest for Omega** by Gregory Chaitin

Chaitin's popularized account of information theory and the derivation of the
constant of his namesakes, the halting probability that represents the
probability that a randomly constructed program will halt. Does a great job of
detailing the many paradoxes that arise out of simple questions about computing.

**The Structure of Scientific Revolutions** by Thomas Kuhn

The most famous philosophy of science book of the last century. Kuhn challenged
the then prevailing views of scientific progress and shed light on the social
structure of how prevailing theories change and come to be accepted. Although
many people disagree with some of the thesis, it's a must read for any grad
student working in the natural sciences.

**The Art of Doing Science and Engineering** by Richard Hamming

The notes from Richard Hamming's lecture series mentoring young scientists and
engineers about his experiences at Bell Labs. In particular his lecture about
[You and Your Research](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a1zDuOPkMSw) should be
watched by everyone regardless of involvement in science.

**Category Theory** by Steve Awodey

**Visual Complex Analysis** by Tristan Needham

Tristan's groundbreaking book on complex analysis was one of the first texts on
this subject written in the age of modern computer graphing tools and sheds an
amazing amount of geometric insight into an otherwise very abstract field of
analysis.

**Abstract Algebra** by David Dummit

**Geometric Algebra for Physicists** by Chris Doran

**The Feynman Lectures on Physics** by Richard Feynman,

**Classical Mechanics** by John R. Taylor

**Tensor Calculus for Physics** by Dwight E. Neuenschwander

**Term Rewriting and all That** by Franz Baader

**The Implementation of Functional Programming Languages** by Simon Peyton Jones

One of the most important books written on compiler design and largely the only
resource *ever* written the full engineering details going into functional
compilers.

**An Introduction to Analysis** Zaring

My favorite real analysis text that I read in conjunction to a course using
Rudin. Has a much more casual presentation and motivates the core ideas much
better than the usual lemma/proof chug of the canonical texts. 

**Functional Differential Geometry** by Gerald Jay Sussman

A implementation of the core ideas of differential geometry implemented in a
computable form as a Scheme program.

**The C Programming Language** by Brian Kernighan and Dennis Ritchie

The book everyone learns C from, although a bit dated it still has a certain
elegance to it's minimalist approach to a minimalist language.

**The Little MLer** by Matthias Felleisen

A whimsical set of discussions around a set of small Standard ML projects.
Convey's the large ideas in typed functional programming, concerning
polymorphism, higher order functions and algebraic datatypes.

**Coders at Work** by Peter Siebel

A collection of interviews with some of he greatest programmers of our
generation, and their perspectives on the state of the craft of programming.
Particularly the interviews with Simon Peyton Jones and Joe Armstrong are
particularly good.

**Essentials of Programming Languages** by Daniel Friedman

**The Demon-Haunted World** Carl Sagan

Carl Sagan's strangely prescient discussion about the role of science and
scientific reasoning has in society. The main thesis is that the "candle" of
scientific progress is a fragile construction that could very well be
extinguished by ignorance and superstition.

<hr/>

#### Soft

Fiction, graphic novels and biographies.

**Diaspora** by Greg Egan

Diaspora focuses on post-human existence when humanity has "speciated" out into
three separate transhuman species. It questions the meaning of human existence
in a transhuman world where human desires are bound up up with ancestral human
biology and what meaning do lives and desires have, and what serves as the basis
of values when biology no longer forms a part of life. Also one of the only
fiction to use the word "fiber bundle" as part of the story.

> Every tunnel in the Mines was built from the steps of a watertight proof;
> every theorem, however deeply buried, could be traced back to every one of its
> assumptions.

**God Emperor of Dune** by Frank Herbert

The Dune series traces the lives of the Atreides family, whose patriarch Paul
discovers a psychoactive substance called "spice" which unlocks his ability to
perceive the future. Paul discovers the terrible truth of being an Oracle - the
more a prophetic vision is fulfilled, the harder it is to avoid the rest of the
vision; and the terrible ramifications a prescient messiahs and hero worship has 
for humanity's long term future. In the final book, humanity is ruled by a 
all-knowing worm god trapped in the existential nightmare of his own prescience.
One of the greatest series ever written in my option.  

> It has occurred to me more than once that holy boredom is good
> and sufficient reason for the invention of free will.

**Prelude to Foundation** by Issac Asimov

Asimov's seminal work about the collapse and rebirth of a advanced
galactic-spanning civilization and the mathematical cult that architects the
future course of human history to a new golden age.

**Watchmen** by Alan Moore

Probably the greatest graphical novel ever written

> Veidt: I did the right thing, didn't I? It all worked out in the end.
>
> Manhattan: 'In the end'? Nothing ends, Adrian. Nothing ever ends.

**Anathem** by Neal Stephenson

In a fictional world a series of technological catastrophes force the planet's
scientists, scholars and philosophers - known as the avout — to live apart from
the ‘Sæcular world’ of society at large and are not permitted access to modern
technology. The avout spend their days engaged in theoretical research until
another plant-wide catastrophe forces them to emerge from their cloisted
existence.

> And it happened all the time that the compromise between two perfectly
> rational alternatives was something that made no sense at all.

**The Man Who Loved Only Numbers** by Paul Hoffman

> As a joke I said, "What is the purpose of Life?" "Proof and conjecture, and keep the Supreme Fascist's score low."

**Einstein** by Walter Isaacson

Isaccson's great biography of Einstein really outlines the struggle of
Einstein's life and the humanity of one of the greatest physicists beyond just
the Annus Mirabilis years. In particular his accounts of the war and the details
of his personal life are much more sad than one might expect.

**Men of Mathematics** by Eric Bell

Men of mathematics is Bell's classic biography of the great mathematicians of
the 20th century. I put this in the fiction category because while highly
entraining a lot of it is embellished. Nevertheless it shines light onto the
lives of a curious group of people who history often forgets but have shaped
modernity in profound ways.

**Contact** by Carl Sagan

**The Culture Series** by Iain Banks
